# Microchains

This section provides an introduction to microchains, the main building block of
the Linera Protocol. For a more formal treatment refer to the
[whitepaper](https://linera.io/whitepaper).

## Background

A **microchain** is a chain of blocks describing successive changes to a shared
state. We will use the terms _chain_ and _microchain_ interchangeably. Linera
microchains are similar to the familiar notion of blockchain, with the following
important specificities:

- An arbitrary number of microchains can coexist in a Linera network, all
  sharing the same set of validators and the same level of security. Creating a
  new microchain only takes one transaction on an existing chain.

- The task of proposing new blocks in a microchain can be assumed either by
  validators or by end users (or rather their wallets) depending on the
  configuration of a chain. Specifically, microchains can be _single-owner_,
  _permissioned_, or _public_, depending on who is authorized to propose blocks.

## Cross-Chain Messaging

In traditional networks with a single blockchain, every transaction can access
the entire execution state. This is not the case in Linera where the state of a
microchain is only affected by its own blocks.

Cross-chain messaging is a way for different microchains to communicate with
each other asynchronously. This method allows applications and data to be
distributed across multiple chains for better scalability. When an application
on one chain sends a message to another chain, a cross-chain request is created.
These requests are implemented using remote procedure calls (RPCs) within the
validators' internal network, ensuring that each request is executed only once.

Instead of immediately modifying the target chain, messages are placed first in
the target chain's **inbox**. When an owner of the target chain creates its next
block in the future, they may reference a selection of messages taken from the
current inbox in the new block. This executes the selected messages and applies
their messages to the chain state.

Below is an example set of chains sending asynchronous messages to each other
over consecutive blocks.

```ignore
                               ┌───┐     ┌───┐     ┌───┐
                       Chain A │   ├────►│   ├────►│   │
                               └───┘     └───┘     └───┘
                                                     ▲
                                           ┌─────────┘
                                           │
                               ┌───┐     ┌─┴─┐     ┌───┐
                       Chain B │   ├────►│   ├────►│   │
                               └───┘     └─┬─┘     └───┘
                                           │         ▲
                                           │         │
                                           ▼         │
                               ┌───┐     ┌───┐     ┌─┴─┐
                       Chain C │   ├────►│   ├────►│   │
                               └───┘     └───┘     └───┘
```

The Linera protocol allows receivers to discard messages but not to change the
ordering of selected messages inside the communication queue between two chains.
If a selected message fails to execute, it is skipped during the execution of
the receiver's block. The current implementation of the Linera client always
selects as many messages as possible from inboxes, and never discards messages.

## Chain Ownership Semantics

Only single-owner chains are currently supported in the Linera SDK. However,
microchains can create new microchains for other users, and control of a chain
can be transferred to another user by changing the owner ID. A chain is
permanently deactivated when its owner ID is set to `None`.

For more detail and examples on how to open and close chains, see the wallet
section on [chain management](wallets.md#opening-a-chain).
